How it works revision (#648)
dfinity/portal: how-it-works/1_protocol/04_execution.subpage.md

slug: execution-layer
---

# Execution

The execution layer is the topmost layer of the IC core protocol stack.
It deterministically schedules and executes the messages that have been agreed on by consensus and inducted into the canister queues by message routing, thereby changing the state of the subnet in a deterministic manner on all the nodes.
The execution of the same sequence of messages on every node of the subnet guarantees that the same ending state is obtained on each node of the subnet after completion of the round. 

> A canister smart contract on the IC is the union of Web Assembly (Wasm) bytecode representing the smart contract program and memory pages representing its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A canister smart contract on the IC consists of a Web Assembly (Wasm) bytecode representing the smart contract program and a set of memory pages representing its state.
```

The Wasm bytecode can be modified by installing or updating the canister.
The smart contract state gets modified when executing messages on the canister smart contract.
Both the bytecode and the memory pages, i.e., the state, of the canister, are maintained by every node machine of the subnet the canister is installed on.
Each node in the subnet holding the same canister state and ensuring that the state transitions in the same way on every node in every round is the foundation of realizing a replicated state machine and the security and resilience properties thereof that make blockchains so unique.

## Concurrent Message Execution

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replicated execution proceeds in rounds.
```

> In one IC round, the message routing layer invokes the execution layer once for executing (a subset of) the messages in the canister input queues.

Reviewer: I think we should introduce "update calls" in this section rather than leave it to the non-replicated execution section.

Reviewer 2: Noted for iteration 2!

This is possible because the generation and enqueuing of the new message is completely deterministic and thus happens in exactly the same way on all the nodes of the subnet – thus there is no need for this new message going through consensus.

New messages targeted at other subnets are placed into the target cross-subnet queue (XNet queue) and are certified by the subnet at the end of the round as part of the per-round state certification.
The receiving subnet can verify that the XNet messages are authenticated by the subnet by validating the signature with the originating subnet's public key.

The execution layer is designed at its core to execute multiple canisters concurrently on different CPU cores.
This is possible because each canister has its own isolated state and canister communication is asynchronous.
This form of concurrent execution within a subnet together with the capability of all of the IC's subnets executing canisters concurrently makes the IC scalable like the public cloud: The IC scales out by adding more subnets.

> ## Concurrent Query Execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Non-replicated Message Execution
```

> Queries are operations that are executed by a single node and return a response synchronously, much like a regular function invocation in an imperative programming language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-replicated message execution, aka queries, are operations executed by a single node and return a response synchronously, much like a regular function invocation in an imperative programming language.
```

Query throughput of a subnet thus increases linearly with an increasing number of nodes in the subnet, while the update call performance decreases with an increasing number of nodes.

Queries are similiar to read operations on a local or cloud Ethereum node on the Ethereum blockchain.
A dApp should use queries for non-critical operations only.
Whenever an information item to be read is critical, e.g., financial data based on which decisions are made, update calls should be used to obtain such information as the response of an update call is certified by the subnet with a BLS threshold signature and verifiable with the subnet's public key.

## Memory Handling

Management of the canister bytecode and state (collectively memory) is one of the key responsibilities of the execution layer.
The replicated state that can be held by a single subnet is not bounded by the available RAM in the node machines, but rather by the available SSD storage.
Available RAM, however, impacts the performance of the subnet, particularly the access latency of memory pages.
This depends a lot on the access patterns of the workload, however, – much like in traditional computer systems.

> Our node machines are equipped with tens of terabytes of high-end SSD storage and over half a terabyte of RAM to be able to hold large amounts of replicated canister state and Wasm code and achieve good performance when accessing memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The node machines that comprise the IC are equipped with tens of terabytes of high-end SSD storage and over half a terabyte of RAM to be able to hold large amounts of replicated canister state and Wasm code and achieve good performance when accessing memory.
```

> While the execution layer maintains the memory data structures and updates them accordingly to reflect modifications to memory pages, the state management component of message routing is responsible for certifying (parts of) the state through the subnet at the end of a round or once every (much longer) checkpointing interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The states obtained while executing canisters are certified (i.e. digitally signed) by the state management component of message routing.  Certification of some parts of the states, including the ingress history and the messages that are sent to other subnetworks are certified every round.  The entire state of a subnetwork, including the state of all canisters hosted by that subnetwork is certified once every (much longer) checkpointing interval.
```

Memory pages representing canister state are persisted to SSD by the execution layer, without canister programmers needing to take care of this.

> Having all memory pages transparently persisted enables *orthogonal persistence* and frees the smart contract programmers from reading from and writing to storage as on other blockchains or as in traditional IT systems.

Reviewer: We're slowly moving away from this idea I think: in particular persistance is manual right now and requires programmers to write the logic for saving/restoring state.

Reviewer 2: Same discussion in gdoc

This dramatically simplifies smart contract implementation and helps reduce the TCO of a dApp and go to market faster.
Programmers can always have the full canister smart contract state on the heap or in stable memory.
The difference is that the heap is cleared on updates of the canister code, while stable memory remains stable throughout updates, hence its name.
Any state on the heap that is to be preserved through a canister update must be transferred to stable memory by a canister programmer before an update and restored from there after the update.

> Best practices are that large canister state be held directly in stable memory to avoid shuffling around large amounts of storage before and after each upgrade.

Reviewer: I don't know if this is always a best practice -- perhaps we should not mention this at this point. I think best practices could be grouped once we have a nice collection of such practices.

Reviewer 2: Sitting with Dieter - thanks for the suggestion, we'll note for a best practices doc!

This also avoids the risk of exceeding the cycles limit allowed in an upgrade operation.

## Cycles Accounting

> The execution of a canister consumes resources of the Internet Computer, which are paid for with *cycles* that the canister must have been topped up with.
> Filling up the canister with cycles is the responsibility of its maintainer, which can be a developer, a group of developers or a decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) – users do never pay for sending messages to canisters on the IC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution of a canister consumes resources of the Internet Computer, which are paid for with *cycles*.  Each canister holds a local cycles account and ensuring that the account holds sufficient cycles is the responsibility of its maintainer, which can be a developer, a group of developers or a decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) – users do never pay for sending messages to canisters on the IC.
```

This resource charging model is known as *reverse gas model* and is a facilitator for mass adoption of the IC.

> Technically, the Wasm code running in a canister gets instrumented, when the Wasm bytecode is installed or updated on the IC, with code that counts the executed instructions for smart contract messageges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, the Wasm code running in a canister gets instrumented, when the Wasm bytecode is installed or updated on the IC, with code that counts the executed instructions for smart contract messages.
```

This allows for deterministically determining the exact amount of cycles to be charged for a given message being executed.
Using Wasm as bytecode format for canister has helped greatly to reach determinism as Wasm itself is a format that is largely deterministic in its execution.
It is crucial that the cycles charging be completely deterministic so that every node charges exactly the same amount of cycles for a given operation and that the replicated state machine properties of the subnet are maintained.

The memory the canister uses in terms of both its Wasm code and canister state needs to be paid for with cycles as well.

> Much like in public cloud, consumed storage is charged for per time unit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much like in the public cloud, consumed storage is charged for per time unit.
```

Compared to other blockchains, it is very inexpensive to store data on the IC.
Furthermore, networking activities such as receiving ingress messages, sending XNet messages, and making HTTPS Outcalls to Web 2.0 servers are paid for in cycles by the canister.

Pricing for a resource on the IC is extremely competitive.
Prices for a given resource, e.g., executing Wasm instructions, scale with the replication factor of the subnet, i.e., the number of nodes that power the subnet.

## Random Number Generation

The IC's execution layer has access to a decentralized pseudorandom number generator, called the *random tape*.
The random tape is built using BLS threshold signatures, much like the random beacon in consensus to determine the block maker ranking in a round.

> The IC's random tape provides an unpredictable and unbiasable source of random numbers that can be used to seed another pseudorandom number generator in each round.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IC's random tape provides an unpredictable and unbiased source of random numbers that can be used to seed another pseudorandom number generator in each round.
```
